# UTMB-SIBDS---CCM
## University of Texas Medical Branch Summer Institute in Biostatistics and Data Science 
---
Trypanosoma cruzi (Tc) is the causative agent for chagasic cardiomyopathy (CCM), to which 120 million people are exposed yearly in Latin America. Vectorial transmission of Tc occurs in the Southern half of the US, and the more than 300,000 infected individuals living in the US can further increase transmission through blood or organ donation. 
Approximately 1/3 of infected individuals will develop tissue fibrosis, ventricular dilation and arrhythmia, leading to heart failure. Chagas disease presents a neglected pathology as no effective therapy is available for the treatment of infected patients, who suffer formidable health challenges resembling those faced by HIV/AIDS patients. 
Dr. Garg’s studies are focused on molecular tools for the diagnosis of at risk patients, and potential therapies for the management of more than 20 million infected individuals at risk of developing cardiomyopathy and heart failure. Dr. Garg has shown that Tc induced intracellular Ca+2 flux (required for parasite invasion) elicits mitochondrial loss of membrane potential, decreased adenosine triphosphate generation and increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes and chagasic hearts. Yet, what signals mitochondrial dysfunction after control of acute infection and why this cannot be arrested to prevent continuous cardiac loss of energy and damage is unknown. 
Dr. Garg is currently testing how Tc induced mtROS/DNA adducts create a feedback cycle of PARP1 activation that constitutes a danger signal in CCM. Her group will work to dissect the mechanism by which PARP1 interacts with the mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ (POLG) replisome and affects mtDNA synthesis in the context of chronic CCM and demonstrate that PARP1 hypoenzymatic activity is protective in incidents of heart failure in CCM. These studies will provide insights into PARP1’s role in disturbing mitochondrial integrity and provide the first indication of PARP1 being a genetic determinant in CCM outcomes.
